Data Cube Documentation ✨ (#31)
Open-EO/openeo.org: documentation/1.0/datacubes.md

# Datacubes

## What are Datacubes?

> Datacubes are multidimensional arrays with one or more spatial or temporal dimension(s). They are the way in which data is represented in OpenEO. They provide a nice and tidy interface for spatiotemproal data and the operations you may want to execute on it. As they are arrays, it might be easiest to look at raster data as an example, even though datacubes can hold vector data as well: In that case, the x and y dimensions typical for raster data would be exchanged for other dimensions, like stations with a number of sensors. Our example data however consists of a 6x7 raster with 4 bands [`blue`, `green`, `red`, `near-infrared`] and 3 timesteps [`2020-10-01`, `2020-10-13`, `2020-10-25`], displayed here in an orderly, time series like manner:

Reviewer: I used "you" and "we" on purpose, also discussed this with Matthias. The vector cubes however can definitely be moved to their own section, especially as there isn't much to do with them yet anyway - good idea!

> Datacubes are multidimensional arrays with one or more spatial or temporal dimension(s). They are the way in which data is represented in OpenEO. They provide a nice and tidy interface for spatiotemproal data and the operations you may want to execute on it. As they are arrays, it might be easiest to look at raster data as an example, even though datacubes can hold vector data as well: In that case, the x and y dimensions typical for raster data would be exchanged for other dimensions, like stations with a number of sensors. Our example data however consists of a 6x7 raster with 4 bands [`blue`, `green`, `red`, `near-infrared`] and 3 timesteps [`2020-10-01`, `2020-10-13`, `2020-10-25`], displayed here in an orderly, time series like manner:

Reviewer 2: In the text it's called "near-infrared", everywhere else "nir" -- I guess that's okay.

Reviewer: It's meant to spell out that abbreviation at the first mention. I believe people will make that connection :)

> Datacubes are multidimensional arrays with one or more spatial or temporal dimension(s). They are the way in which data is represented in OpenEO. They provide a nice and tidy interface for spatiotemproal data and the operations you may want to execute on it. As they are arrays, it might be easiest to look at raster data as an example, even though datacubes can hold vector data as well: In that case, the x and y dimensions typical for raster data would be exchanged for other dimensions, like stations with a number of sensors. Our example data however consists of a 6x7 raster with 4 bands [`blue`, `green`, `red`, `near-infrared`] and 3 timesteps [`2020-10-01`, `2020-10-13`, `2020-10-25`], displayed here in an orderly, time series like manner:

Reviewer: resolved with new commit. The explanation of vector cubes is withheld for a more detailed chapter to follow.

<figure>
    <img src="./datacubes/dc_timeseries.png" alt="Datacube timeseries">

>     <figcaption>An example datacube with x, y, bands and time dimension.</figcaption>

Reviewer: I thought it's better to highlight parameters, to make clear they are somewhat special to the example, but to not highlight dim names as they are a convention and therefore a normal part of the text. other thoughts @m-mohr @edzer ?

>     <figcaption>An example datacube with x, y, bands and time dimension.</figcaption>

Author: I have no strong preference, both options are good to understand.

>     <figcaption>An example datacube with x, y, bands and time dimension.</figcaption>

Reviewer 2: Regardless of whether we highlight it or not (I can live with either way), I think the "4 dimensions: [list]" adds clarity, but that's just a minor detail.

>     <figcaption>An example datacube with x, y, bands and time dimension.</figcaption>

Reviewer: I like the 
> "4 dimensions: [list]"

so I added it :)

</figure>

> It is important to understand that datacubes are designed to make things easier for us, and are not literally a cube, meaning that the above plot is just as good a way to represent the dimensionality than any other. That is why we can display the dimensions how we want and switch them around a bit, including the view below. Here, dimension labels are shown instead of names:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important to understand that datacubes are designed to make things easier for us, and are not literally a cube, meaning that the above plot is just as good a representation as any other. That is why we can switch the dimensions around and display them in whatever way we want, including the view below (dimension labels are shown):
```

How about this? because the plot above this "flat" one is actually mixing names and labels, it wasn't even a useful sentence. So now the hint that these are the labels suffices.

> It is important to understand that datacubes are designed to make things easier for us, and are not literally a cube, meaning that the above plot is just as good a way to represent the dimensionality than any other. That is why we can display the dimensions how we want and switch them around a bit, including the view below. Here, dimension labels are shown instead of names:

Reviewer 2: > the plot above this "flat" one is actually mixing names and labels

I didn't even notice that yet :sweat_smile: 

:arrow_right: Is this hint even necessary? Maybe move it to the figure's caption.

> It is important to understand that datacubes are designed to make things easier for us, and are not literally a cube, meaning that the above plot is just as good a way to represent the dimensionality than any other. That is why we can display the dimensions how we want and switch them around a bit, including the view below. Here, dimension labels are shown instead of names:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important to understand that datacubes are designed to make things easier for us, and are not literally a cube, meaning that the above plot is just as good a representation as any other. That is why we can switch the dimensions around and display them in whatever way we want, including the view below:
```

Yes, perfect. I'll keep your suggested changes in the text and change the figcaption separately.

<figure>
    <img src="./datacubes/dc_flat.png" alt="Datacube timeseries">
    <figcaption>This is the 'raw' data collection that is our example datacube. The grayscale images are colored for understandability.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Dimensions

> A dimension refers to a certain extent of a datacube. There are the obvious spatial dimensions x and y, and also the temporal dimension t. Furthermore there is the bands dimension, extending into the realm of _what kind of information_ is contained in the datacube.

Reviewer 2: Can there be other dimensions too except the 4 that are named here?

Reviewer 2: Then that should somehow be reflected in the text. The current wording ("there are", "there is", especially together with "furthermore") could be interpreted as "These are the ones that exist, no more".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A dimension refers to a certain axis of a datacube. Our exemplary raster datacube has the spatial dimensions x and y, and the temporal dimension t. Furthermore it has a bands dimension, extending into the realm of _what kind of information_ is contained in the cube.
```
I agree, how about this? This way it's explicitly about the example cube while not diving too deep. Fixing from "extent" to "axis" as well.
What other dimensions can there be, @m-mohr?

> A dimension refers to a certain extent of a datacube. There are the obvious spatial dimensions x and y, and also the temporal dimension t. Furthermore there is the bands dimension, extending into the realm of _what kind of information_ is contained in the datacube.

Reviewer 2: In the text the temporal dimension is called `t`, in the table and the graphics `time`.

Reviewer: I think for the table, consistency makes sense (noted, will change) but not for graphics, which I hope could partly stand for themselves.

Reviewer 2: Yeah that's fine, I prefer "time" in the graphics too.

> A dimension refers to a certain extent of a datacube. There are the obvious spatial dimensions x and y, and also the temporal dimension t. Furthermore there is the bands dimension, extending into the realm of _what kind of information_ is contained in the datacube.

Author: Yes, I agree.

> A dimension refers to a certain extent of a datacube. There are the obvious spatial dimensions x and y, and also the temporal dimension t. Furthermore there is the bands dimension, extending into the realm of _what kind of information_ is contained in the datacube.

Reviewer: great idea! fixing this in a suggestion below this one.

> A dimension refers to a certain extent of a datacube. There are the obvious spatial dimensions x and y, and also the temporal dimension t. Furthermore there is the bands dimension, extending into the realm of _what kind of information_ is contained in the datacube.

Reviewer: Added highlighting.

> There are multiple properties stored for each dimension:

Reviewer: That I don't know. @m-mohr ?

> There are multiple properties stored for each dimension:

Author: No, for example, bands don't have their own reference system, which is stored only for spatial and temporal dimensions.
It's an implementation detail though. We could write something like:

```suggestion
The following properties are usually available for dimensions:
```

* name
* axis / number

> * type

Author: pre-defined types: spatial, temporal, bands, other - Including it in the table would result in the following (pretty obvious) mapping:

- x + y => spatial
- t => temporal
- bands => bands

> * type

Reviewer 2: Thanks. "Pre-defined" according to the openEO API spec I guess? I agree that's quite obvious then, but only when you know that it's these values that are possible. I'd include them in the table nonetheless.

> * type

Reviewer 2: Don't know what to do about "other". Maybe simply:

```suggestion
* type (spatial/temporal/bands/other)
```

> * type

Author: Yes, they are pre-defined by the API.

* extents _or_ nominal dimension labels
* reference system / projections
* resolution

Here is an overview of the dimensions contained in our example datacube above:

| # | dimension name | dimension labels | resolution |
|---|----------------|------------------| ---------- |
| 1 | x              | 466380, 466580, 466780, 466980, 467180, 467380 | 10m |
| 2 | y              | 7167130, 7166930, 7166730, 7166530, 7166330, 7166130, 7165930 | 10m |
| 3 | bands          | `blue`, `green`, `red`, `nir` | 4 bands |
| 4 | time           | `2020-10-01`, `2020-10-13`, `2020-10-25` | 12 days |

### Processes on Dimensions

> Some processes are typically applied "along a dimension". You can imagine said dimension as an arrow and whatever is happening as a parallel process to that arrow. It simply means: "we focus on _this_ dimension right now".

Reviewer: yup I was afraid it wouldn't. I made a note and will take it out.

### Resolution

> The resolution of a dimension gives information about what interval lies between observations. This is most obvious with the temporal resolution, where the intervals depict how often obervations were made. Spatial resolution gives information about the pixel spacing, meaning how many 'real world meters' are contained in a pixel. You can also think of how many bands you have as the resolution in the band dimension (i.e. spectral resolution).

Reviewer 2: Is "spectral resolution" correctly explained with "how many bands you have"??

Reviewer: For example the [sentinel 2 description](https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/missions/sentinel-2/instrument-payload/resolution-and-swath) states:
> Spectral resolution is defined as a measure of ability to resolve features in the electromagnetic spectrum.

So yep, "how many bands" falls a bit short as an explanation. 
Suggestions are welcome, I'll also try to come up with different wording.

Reviewer 2: @edzer What is your opinion on this?

Reviewer: Maybe "You can also think of how many _and what_ bands you have as the resolution in the `bands` dimension (i.e. spectral resolution)."?

Reviewer 3: I suggest to replace "You can also think of how many bands you have as the resolution in the bands dimension (i.e. spectral resolution)." with "For the `band` dimension, the resolution would correspond to the spectral distance between consecutive bands, but this usually varies from band to band."

Reviewer: committed the above suggestion :)

> ## Functions on Datacubes

Reviewer: The chapter is now called "Applying Processes on Dimensions".

> ## Functions on Datacubes

Reviewer 2: I'm just cautious to use consistent terminology whenever possible. Mainly to avoid confusion.

The [glossary](https://openeo.org/documentation/1.0/glossary.html#processes) says:
> A process is an operation that performs a specific task on a set of parameters and returns a result. An example is computing a statistical operation, such as mean or median, on selected EO data. A process is **similar** to a function or method in programming languages.

(emphasis mine; I think this was written by @edzer)

> The chapter is now called "Applying Processes on Dimensions".

You meant "Processes on Datacubes" but yeah, I think that's better, so we at least don't have the two different words right after each other :+1:

In the following part, the basic processes for manipulating datacubes are introduced.

### Filter

> When filtering data, only the data within the filter interval is returned. That can be a time interval, coordinates or specific bands. The datacube is then smaller, according to the selected data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When filtering data, only the data that satisfies a condition is returned. For example, this condition could be a timestamp or interval, (a set of) coordinates, or specific bands. By applying filtering the datacube becomes smaller, according to the selected data.
```
- The filtering condition is not necessarily an interval
- The list of what that filtering condition could be is incomplete, hence "For example"
- I expanded the examples to showcase the multitude of possibilities (feel free to change them as you like)

Reviewer: no need to change, I like the examples as you suggested.

> In the image, the example datacube can be seen at the top with labeled dimensions. The filtering techniques are displayed separately below. First, the Datacube is filtered temporally with the interval `["2020-10-15", "2020-10-27"]`. The result is a cube with only the rasters for the timestep that lies within that interval (`"2020-10-25"`) and unchanged bands and spatial dimensions. Consecutively, the original cube is filtered for a specific band `[nir]` and a specific region `[Polygon(...)]`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the image, the example datacube can be seen at the top with labeled dimensions. The filtering techniques are displayed separately below. On the left, the datacube is filtered temporally with the interval `["2020-10-15", "2020-10-27"]`. The result is a cube with only the rasters for the timestep that lies within that interval (`"2020-10-25"`) and unchanged bands and spatial dimensions. Likewise, the original cube is filtered for a specific band `["nir"]` in the middle and a specific spatial region `[Polygon(...)]` on the right.
```
The different filterings here are not applied one after the other, but all to the same data, so I changed the words that would have indicated a step-by-step process.

Reviewer: Yes, good note.

<figure>

>     <img src="./datacubes/dc_filter.png" alt="Datacube timeseries">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <img src="./datacubes/dc_filter.png" alt="Datacube filtering">
```

    <figcaption>Filtering the sample datacube. It is displayed at the top with dimensions labels. Filtered results are shown at the bottom.</figcaption>
</figure>

### Apply

> The `apply*()` functions employs a process on the datacube that calculates new pixel values for each pixel, based on `n` other pixels.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `apply()` function employs a process on the datacube that calculates new pixel values for each pixel, based on `n` other pixels.
```
Or does that asterisk have a meaning?? If so, please explain.

Reviewer: Well there are `apply`, `apply_dimension`, `apply_kernel` and `apply_neighbourhood`. I adopted this from current datacube doc, I like it.

Author: Maybe we could change to 

```suggestion
The `apply*` functions (e.g. `apply`, `apply_dimension` and `apply_kernel`) employ a process on the datacube that calculates new pixel values for each pixel, based on `n` other pixels.
```

We could also link the process names to processes.openeo.org, e.g.

```
`[apply](https://processes.openeo.org/#apply)`
```

Reviewer: I added links to the functions for all chapters.

For the case `n = 1` this is called an unary function and means that only the pixel itself is considered when calculating the new pixel value. A prominent example is the `abs()` function, calculating the absolute value of the input pixel value. 

<figure>

>     <img src="./datacubes/dc_apply_unary.png" alt="Datacube timeseries">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <img src="./datacubes/dc_apply_unary.png" alt="Datacube apply unary">
```

    <figcaption>Applying an unary process. Only the pixel itself is considered for calculating the new pixel value.</figcaption>
</figure>

> If `n` is larger than 1, the function is called n-ary. In practice, this means that the pixel neighbourhood is taken into account to calculate the new pixel value. Such neighbourhoods can be of temporal and/or spatial nature. A temporal (e.g. smoothing) function works on a time series at a certain pixel location, a spatial function works on a kernel that weights the surrounding pixels. Original dimensions and their resolutions usually remain unchanged when `apply()`-ing some process.

Reviewer 2: This sounds a bit like "smoothing" is only possible for temporal, but of course it can just as well be applied spatially. In general I don't really like that the different types of dimensions are described differently in this paragraph -- isn't the temporal example in fact also just a "kernel"? I thought it's the very point of datacubes that dimensions can be treated all the same.

Reviewer: Tricky. I tried here to make things that are clear to me and you a bit more understandable for people that have never done any of this. And I think from that perspective it's easier to look at the difference. The spatial kernel apply is called `apply_kernel`, vs e.g. `apply_neighbourhood` that can be used for temporal apply. I think the subtleties can wait.

The `(e.g. smoothing)` was added because I think it's harder to understand a temporal neighbourhood than a spatial neighbourhood (more natural use of "neighbourhood"), for people to get an idea of what could be done here. We can take it out if that is a source of confusion.

Reviewer 2: To me that raises the question why there are two different openEO processes for this at all, but that's not the point here :upside_down_face: 

Hm, I thought about it a bit and have come to the conclusion "yeah, better leave it out".

But actually having an example is good, so maybe:

> A temporal function works on a time series at a certain pixel location (e.g. smoothing values over time), a spatial function works on a kernel that weights the surrounding pixels (e.g. smoothing values with nearby observations).

Reviewer: Great idea for the sentence, committing this as well :)

In the example below, an example weighted kernel (shown in the middle) is applied to the cube. To avoid edge effects (affecting pixels on the edge of the image with less neighbours), a padding has been added in the background.

<figure>

>     <img src="./datacubes/dc_apply_kernel.png" alt="Datacube timeseries">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <img src="./datacubes/dc_apply_kernel.png" alt="Datacube apply spatial kernel">
```

    <figcaption>Applying a spatial kernel. For calculating each new pixel value, the defined weighted neighbourhood is used.</figcaption>
</figure>

Of course this also works for temporal neighbourhoods (time series), considering neighbours before and after a pixel. To be able to show the effect, two timesteps were added in this example figure. A moving average of window size 3 is then applied. While this process is applied to all pixels in the cube, a specific pixel time series is highlighted (green line) and processed step-by-step. No padding was added which is why we observe edge effects (NA values are returned for t<sub>1</sub> and t<sub>5</sub>, because their temporal neighbourhood is missing input timesteps).

<figure>

>     <img src="./datacubes/dc_apply_ts.png" alt="Datacube timeseries">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <img src="./datacubes/dc_apply_ts.png" alt="Datacube apply temporal moving average">
```

>     <figcaption>Applying a moving average (temporal smoothing) by avegraging the direct temporal neighbourhoods of pixels. No padding is used, which leads to edge effects.</figcaption>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <figcaption>Applying a moving average (temporal smoothing) by averaging the direct temporal neighbourhoods of pixels. No padding is used, which leads to edge effects.</figcaption>
```
typo

</figure>

### Resample

> In a resampling process, the _layout_ of a certain dimension is changed into another _layout_, most likely also changing the resolution of that dimension. This is done by mapping values of the source (old) datacube to the new layout of the target (new) datacube. During that process, resolutions can be _upscaled_ or _downscaled_ (or ~_sampled_), depending on whether they have a finer or a coarser spacing afterwards. During that process, a function is needed to translate the existing data into the new resolution. A prominent example is to reproject a datacube into the coordinate reference system of another datacube, for example in order to merge the two cubes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a resampling process, the _layout_ of a certain dimension is changed into another _layout_, most likely also changing the resolution of that dimension. This is done by mapping values of the source (old) datacube to the new layout of the target (new) datacube. During that process, resolutions can be _upscaled_ or _downscaled_ (also called _upsampling_ and _downsampling_), depending on whether they have a finer or a coarser spacing afterwards. During that process, a function is needed to translate the existing data into the new resolution. A prominent example is to reproject a datacube into the coordinate reference system of another datacube, for example in order to merge the two cubes.
```
easier to understand

> In a resampling process, the _layout_ of a certain dimension is changed into another _layout_, most likely also changing the resolution of that dimension. This is done by mapping values of the source (old) datacube to the new layout of the target (new) datacube. During that process, resolutions can be _upscaled_ or _downscaled_ (or ~_sampled_), depending on whether they have a finer or a coarser spacing afterwards. During that process, a function is needed to translate the existing data into the new resolution. A prominent example is to reproject a datacube into the coordinate reference system of another datacube, for example in order to merge the two cubes.

Reviewer 2: Merging two cubes is a concept that is new here -- does mentioning it help in understanding or does it lead to confusion? Should it be explained in more detail, possibly in a separate section? (open questions)

Reviewer: It is indeed but I think it gives an example for _why_ one would want to resample. I wouldn't open a section on it, as it's not a core datacube process. if other ppl think it's confusing we can remove

Reviewer 2: Convinces me :+1: Just leave it then.

The first figure gives an overview of temporal resampling. How exactly the input timesteps are rescaled to the output timesteps depends on the resampling function.

<figure>

>     <img src="./datacubes/dc_resample_time.png" alt="Datacube timeseries">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <img src="./datacubes/dc_resample_time.png" alt="Datacube temporal resampling (up and down)">
```

>     <figcaption>Temporal downscaling is seen on the left, upscaling on the right. The temporal layout that the cubes are resampled to is displayed in the middle.</figcaption>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <figcaption>Temporal downsampling is seen on the left, upsampling on the right. The temporal layout that the cubes are resampled to is displayed in the middle.</figcaption>
```
Stick to one of the terms. Especially don't use a different one in the caption than in the actual graphic.

</figure>

> The second figure displays spatial resampling. Common resampling methods are "near" and "bilinear". Observe how in the upsampling process, the output datacube has not gained in information value. The resulting grid still carries the same pixel information, but in higher spatial resolution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The second figure showcases spatial resampling. Common resampling methods are "nearest neighbour" and "bilinear interpolation". Note that in the upsampling process, the output datacube has not gained in information value. The resulting grid still carries the same pixel information, but in higher spatial resolution.
```
I think those are the ones you meant? Anyway, I think it would be very good to describe them at least in somewhat more detail!

What is described in the second sentence can't really be "observed" that good in the figure... It's up to you whether you want to change the text or the figure ;)

Reviewer: You are right, the example methods can go. Or I could only mention "nearest neighbour" and explain further. 
> can't really be "observed" that good in the figure

Yup that's simply a "space in the graphic" issue. I hope it's visible when zooming in.

Author: Images will also be a bit larger on the website, I think.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second figure displays spatial resampling. Observe how in the upsampling process, the output datacube has not gained in information value. The resulting grid still carries the same pixel information, but in higher spatial resolution.
```
I would like to leave it "Observe", so people go look at it instead of accepting it.

Reviewer: updated with new commit

Reviewer 2: > I would like to leave it "Observe", so people go look at it instead of accepting it.

Good point, I like that! :+1: 

This "space in the graphic issue" would be solved when using the flat representation as suggested in [the other comment](https://github.com/Open-EO/openeo.org/pull/31#issuecomment-802016385).

> You are right, the example methods can go.

No :open_mouth: I'd at least name them, so readers get a clue what to google if they ask themselves "how the heck is that supposed to work" since _adding_ information sounds weird at first.

> Or I could only mention "nearest neighbour" and explain further.

Better, but I'd still list both. I understand that explaining bilinear interpolation is a bit over the top though. So TBH I'd settle for what I suggested above: Just name both and if anyone wants to know the details, they can consult the search engine of their choice.

<figure>

>     <img src="./datacubes/dc_resample_space.png" alt="Datacube timeseries">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <img src="./datacubes/dc_resample_space.png" alt="Datacube spatial resampling (up and down)">
```

    <figcaption>Spatial resampling. The geometry which the input cube is resampled to is displayed in the middle. The output cube then contains the same information, but in the resampled spatial layout.</figcaption>
</figure>

### Reduce

> The `reduce_dimension*()` process _collapses_ a whole dimension of the datacube. It does so by using some sort of **reducer**, which is a function that calculates a single result from an amount of values, as e.g. `mean()`, `min()` and `max()` are. For example can we reduce the time dimension of a time series by calculating the mean value out of all timesteps for each pixel. We are left with a cube that has no time dimension, because all values are compressed into a single mean value. The same goes for e.g. the spatial dimensions: If we calculate the mean along the x and y dimensions, we are left without any spatial dimensions, but a mean value for each instance that previously was a raster is returned. In the image below, the dimensions that are reduced are crossed out in the result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `reduce_dimension()` process _collapses_ a whole dimension of the datacube. It does so by using some sort of **reducer**, which is a function that calculates a single result from an amount of values, as e.g. `mean()`, `min()` and `max()` are. For example we can reduce the time dimension of a time series by calculating the mean value over all timesteps for each pixel. We are left with a cube that has no time dimension, because all values of that dimension are compressed into a single mean value. The same goes for e.g. the spatial dimensions: If we calculate the mean along the x and y dimensions, we are left without any spatial dimensions, but a mean value for each instance that previously was a raster is returned. In the image below, the dimensions that are reduced are crossed out in the result.
```
Same question with the asterisk again?

Word order, correct proposition, clarity

Reviewer: Additionally there is `reduce_dimension_binary()`.
thanks for grammar correction, one comment: I wrote "out of all timesteps" because the meaning of "_over_ all timesteps" is something I learned along the way and didn't know from the start. Maybe "... mean of all timesteps" works?

Reviewer 2: All my grammar suggestions are just from my gut feeling, but having spent two years down under and ingested an English article or two, I'm fairly confident it's correct :)

Yes, "mean value of all timesteps" is perfectly fine too :+1: (I'd keep the "value")

Reviewer: cool :) will push in next commit.

> Think of it as a waste press that does math instead of using brute force. Given a representation of our example data cube, let's see how it is affected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Think of it as a waste press that does math instead of using brute force. Given a representation of our example datacube, let's see how it is affected.
```
The *only* occurrence in this text where this word is spelled *with* the space.

> Think of it as a waste press that does math instead of using brute force. Given a representation of our example data cube, let's see how it is affected.

Reviewer 2: Doesn't a waste press squash in all directions, not just one? That would render this analogy (that I like in general) somewhat misleading :(

<figure>

>     <img src="./datacubes/dc_reduce.png" alt="Datacube timeseries">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <img src="./datacubes/dc_reduce.png" alt="Datacube reduce">
```

    <figcaption>Overview of reducing the sample datacube. Dimensions that are reduced are crossed out in the result images. Their information value has been compressed by a reducer function.</figcaption>
</figure>

### Aggregate

An aggregation of a datacube can be thought of as a grouped reduce. That means it consists of two steps: 

1. Grouping via a grouping variable, i.e. spatial geometries or temporal intervals
2. Reducing these groups along the grouped dimension with a certain reducer function, e.g. calculating the mean pixel value per polygon or the maximum pixel values per month

> While the layout of the reduced dimension is changed, other dimensions keep their resolution and geometry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the layout of the reduced dimension is changed, other dimensions keep their resolution and geometry. But in contrast to pure `reduce`, the dimension along which `aggregate` is performed still exists after the operation.
```
Maybe that helps clarifying things?

Reviewer: idk. for me, "the layout ... is changed" implies this.

Author: We can just add it in, it may improve things but certainly doesn't make things worse. ;-)

Reviewer: agreed.

A temporal aggregation is similar to the downsampling process, as it can be seen in the according image above. Intervals for grouping can either be set manually, or periods can be chosen: monthly, yearly, etc. All timesteps in an interval are then collapsed via a reducer function (mean, max, etc.) and assigned to the given new labels.

> A spatial agregation works in a similar manner. Polygons, lines and points can be selected for grouping. Their spatial dimension is then reduced by a given process and thus, a vector cube is returned. The vector cube then has dimensions containing features, attributes and time. In the graphic below, the grouping is only shown for the first timestep. 

Reviewer 2: Again, maybe this is better suited in a dedicated "vector cubes" section?

Reviewer: I think it's important to understand what the spatial aggregation does. And as a vector cube is returned, I think it's wrong to not mention this here.

<figure>

>     <img src="./datacubes/dc_aggregate_space.png" alt="Datacube timeseries">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <img src="./datacubes/dc_aggregate_space.png" alt="Datacube spatial aggregation">
```

    <figcaption>This is the 'raw' data collection that is included in our example datacube. The grayscale values of the imagery are colored for understandability.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Dimensions
 A dimension refers to a certain extent of a datacube. There are the obvious spatial dimensions x and y, and also the temporal dimension t. Furthermore there is the bands dimension, extending into the realm of _what_ is contained in the datacube.

 There are multiple additional properties stored for each dimension:

 * name
 * axis / number
 * type
 * extents _or_ nominal dimension labels
 * reference system / projections
 * resolution

Here is an overview of the dimensions contained in our example datacube above:

| # | dimension name | dimension labels | resolution |
|---|----------------|------------------| ---------- |
| 1 | x              | 466380, 466580, 466780, 466980, 467180, 467380, | 10m |
| 2 | y              | 7167130, 7166930, 7166730, 7166530, 7166330, 7166130, 7165930 | 10m |
| 3 | bands          | `blue`, `green`, `red`, `nir` | 4 bands |
| 4 | time           | `2020-10-01`, `2020-10-13`, `2020-10-25` | 12 days |
 

>  ### Processes on Dimensions

Author: Throughout the document many lines start with a space character. That should be fixed. @jonathom

Author: Fixed

# Datacubes

Generic Intro

> TODOs / Questions:

Author: Remove the ToDos @jonathom  ;-)

Reviewer: done [x]

    <img src="./datacubes/dc_filter.png" alt="Datacube filtering">
    <figcaption>Filtering the sample datacube. It is displayed at the top with dimensions labels. Filtered results are shown at the bottom.</figcaption>
</figure>

### Apply

The `apply*` functions (e.g. [`apply`](https://processes.openeo.org/#apply), [`apply_dimension`](https://processes.openeo.org/#apply_dimension), [`apply_kernel`](https://processes.openeo.org/#apply_kernel)) employ a process on the datacube that calculates new pixel values for each pixel, based on `n` other pixels.

::: tip Simplified
<span title="Applying the process 'cook' to [corn, potato, pig] returns [popcorn, fries, meat].">`apply([🌽, 🥔, 🐷], cook) => [🍿, 🍟, 🍖]`</span>
:::

For the case `n = 1` this is called an unary function and means that only the pixel itself is considered when calculating the new pixel value. A prominent example is the `absolute()` function, calculating the absolute value of the input pixel value. 

<figure>
    <img src="./datacubes/dc_apply_unary.png" alt="Datacube apply unary">
    <figcaption>Applying an unary process. Only the pixel itself is considered for calculating the new pixel value.</figcaption>
</figure>

> If `n` is larger than 1, the function is called n-ary. In practice, this means that the pixel neighbourhood is taken into account to calculate the new pixel value. Such neighbourhoods can be of temporal and/or spatial nature. A temporal function works on a time series at a certain pixel location (e.g. smoothing values over time), a spatial function works on a kernel that weights the surrounding pixels (e.g. smoothing values with nearby observations).

Reviewer: Regarding your first point, I thought that `apply_neighbourhood` is sufficiently explained here via the temporal neighbourhood (with example: smoothing). Then there's also the third `apply` figure where a moving average is applied (introduced with "Of course this also works for temporal neighbourhoods (timeseries), considering neighbours before and after a pixel."). 

Or am I not getting this correctly? We could certainly add the breakpoints example to the brackets: "(e.g. smoothing values over time, breakpoint detection etc.)"

Reviewer 3: I agree that `apply_neighbourhood` is sufficiently explained, I worried that `apply_dimension` is not sufficiently explained. Breakpoint detection is (in general) _not_ a neighbourhood method.

Reviewer: My mistake. I added an explanation for apply_dimension ([see commit](https://github.com/Open-EO/openeo.org/pull/31/commits/1eabdceff45ec1e30863842a3bea9f5494a8605b)). 
Maybe this is also something that could go in another graphic, as it is important for the difference towards `reduce`. But we can wait for user feedback here.
If you're ok with the new explanation we can push, I think.
